-----------------------------------------------
Codeblocks & Captures in Lasso 9
-----------------------------------------------

Introduction

	This specification describes several extensions and some semantic changes to existing Lasso 9 features. It details the purpose and function of "captures" and "codeblocks" in Lasso 9. This document follows the "Signatures & Associations" specification, and so a familiarity with that document is assumed in this one.
	
	A codeblock can be thought of as being a method, or a function, or a custom tag. They permit specific units of functionality to be reified and reused. A codeblock is comprised of a series or list of valid Lasso 9 language expressions. Codeblocks accept parameters and produce values. Codeblocks are generated by compiling Lasso 9 source code. Once a codeblock has been compiled, it can be invoked, which results in it executing each of its expressions until it either runs out of expressions to execute, returns or yields.
	
	A Capture is a bundling of a codeblock along with an execution environment. Captures can be invoked repeatedly and each time they will maintain their current environment, including any modifications made on previous executions. In some languages, this concept is referred to as a "lexical closure".
	
	All code that Lasso 9 executes is contained within a codeblock which is running in a capture. 
	
	This document deals with the following topics:
	
	Codeblocks
		How they are created. How they are used. How they rely on Signatures.
	
	Auto-Collect Codeblocks
		Purpose, differences. How they are created.

	Compiling Source Code
		How new codeblocks can be created given literal source code text.
		
	Dispatch
		How codeblocks are selected at runtime for execution. How parameters help decide. How parameters are processed. Re-dispatching.
		
	Accepting Parameters
		How required, optional and rest parameters are processed when invoking a codeblock.
	
	Returning Values
		Return and Yield.
		
	Captures
		How they are created. How they are used. How they rely on Codeblocks. What a "homeCapture" is. Differences in return and yield behavior. ReturnHome, YieldHome.

Compatibility
	
	This specification contains two points relevant to compatibility concerns.
	
	First, the meaning of { } when used as a value has changed. In previous versions of Lasso, { } produced a "tag" object (which is analogous to a Lasso 9 "codeblock"). This simple tag object had no sort of parameter specifications and had no binding to surrounding local variables or other state. In Lasso 9, curly braces used as an expression/value create a "capture" object, which does have access to the surrounding environment, the semantics of which are detailed in this document. Since this change presents only positive functionality (previously valid usages are unaltered - only previously invalid usages would now be valid), this change is considered to be of low impact and will not be accounted for.
	
	Second, ?? regarding parameter restrictions?
	how optional parameters are changed WRT default values
	
Goals
	
	The goals for these changes are as follows:
		
		Improve support for lexical closures
		Add real support for "auto-collect" codeblocks
		Add support for generators
		Specify behavior of non-local returns and yields
		Refine support for multiple-dispatch
		
Codeblocks

	A Codeblock is a series of language source code expressions which have been successfully parsed and compiled down to a stream of Lasso VM instructions, or "code". In addition to the actual compiled code, a codeblock maintains a list of "constants" which are the simple data elements required for executing that code. Source code elements such as string literals and even other codeblocks are stored in this constants list. Codeblocks also optionally contain information used for debugging and error reporting.	

	A codeblock is associated with a signature in order to specify the name of the block and the number and variety of parameters that it accepts. This association is accomplished by using the reserved word "define", followed by the signature describing the codeblock, the association operator "=>" and then the expression(s) for the codeblock itself. These expressions are compiled into executable Lasso VM code after parsing has completed. Codeblocks are usually presented in the association as a set of curly braces "{}" surrounding zero or more valid expressions. Every expression within the curly braces is part of the codeblock.

	In the following, the codeblock that is created consists of the signature "foo()" and the compiled expressions within the curly braces.
	
	define foo() => {
		local(bar = 'asasasasasasasas')
		while(#bar >> 's')
			#bar->remove('s');
		/while
		return (#bar)
	}

	When "foo" is called the codeblock is executed and its return value is produced.
	
	foo // Yields: aaaaaaaa

Auto-Collect Codeblocks

	Auto-Collect codeblocks operate nearly as normal (non-auto-collect) codeblocks do. They differ in how their return value is processed and how the result of each expression in their bodies is handled. Auto-collect codeblocks begin execution with their return value set to a new empty string. As each body-level expression is executed, its value is automatically appended to this return value using the "+=" operator. When the codeblock completes, the return value is automatically produced to the caller. Auto-collect codeblocks are not permitted to return alternate values, though they may directly manipulate their return value by utilizing the special expression "returnValue".

Q: camel case or underscores?
A: ??

	Auto-Collect codeblocks are useful when performing operations which rely heavily on text formatting and text generation. This method permits such code to be constructed without manually concatenating into a local variable for later return. It permits the concatenations to take place without usage of the + operator, usually used for string concatenation. This automatic collection mechanism only applies the the body-level expressions in the codeblock. Auto-Collect is also useful when templating, where documents consist of mainly literal text but are interposed with executable code which control the manner in which various segments are generated.
	
	These special codeblocks are defined in the same manner as regular codeblocks, but with the special curly brace sequence "{^ ^}". Between the opening "{^" and the closing "^}" are the zero or more expressions which make up the auto-collect codeblock's body.
	
Examples
	
	define foo(x, y, z) => {^
		'x was: ' #x
		'y was: ' #y
		'z was: ' #z
	^}
	
	The following is equivalent to the above. Semi-colons are used to indicate the individual expression values which are being automatically collected and used as the return value.
	
	define foo(x, y, z) => {^
		'x was: ';
		#x;
		'y was: ';
		#y;
		'z was: ';
		#z
	^}

Compiling Source Code
	
	A new codeblock can be created and instructed to parse and compile a chunk of source code text. Once the code has been compiled, it is set the the codeblocks code. A codeblock that already has code can not be recompiled with  different source text. Source text which contains syntax errors will generate an osErrSyntaxError failure. Once successfully parsed, any compilation errors will cause an osErrCompilationError failure.
	
	Compilation is accomplished through the member: codeblock->compile. This member comes in a couple of varieties.

	codeblock->compile(source::string)
	codeblock->compile(source::string, name::string, autoCollect::boolean)

	The first simply accepts the source code text for compilation. The second accepts not only the source code text, but also permits a name to be assigned to the text in order to aid in error reporting, and a boolean indicating whether the source text should be compiled as auto-collect or not.
	
	If the parsing and compilation are successful, then the codeblock is ready for execution.

Q: what sort of signature does this kind of codeblock have?
A: none currently, but one should be able to be set somehow
	
Dispatch
	
	Dispatch is the process of selecting an element to execute (invoke) given a name and a series of parameters. This process occurs when selecting both members or non-members given a "tag". A tag is a unique character string value. Any unquoted name used in the language becomes a tag at some point. Tags are used to refer to elements contained within a "membermap". Each object contains a membermap which is called its "tag members" (some objects also contain data members). The current tag registry also contains a membermap in which are kept all of the non-member tags which are in the global namespace.
	
	Membermaps permit multiple elements to be stored under a single tag, given a few restrictions. Under a single tag name, a membermap may contain at most one non-codeblock element, and may also contain any number of codeblock elements, provided that they each possess non-conflicting signatures.
	
	Two signatures are considered to conflict if they both:
		1) Have the same name (in this context of being contained under the same membermap tag, we know this is true)
		2) Have the same number of required parameters (optional parameters are not considered when checking the identity of a signature)
		3) The type descriptors for all of their required parameters are the same (parameters without an explicit type decl have an implicit "any" type decl)
	
	Therefore, two or more codeblocks that have different numbers of required parameters or the same number of required parameters but different type declarations (eg. ::string) on at least one of them can all inhabit the same tag in the same membermap. Inserting a conflicting element into a membermap results in the previous element being replaced by the new element.
	
	Dispatch proceeds in a somewhat different manner depending on whether what is being looked up is a member tag or a non-member tag. The given set of parameters (which may be empty) is utilized to find the best matching codeblock.
	
	For member tags, the algorithm is as follows:
		(we use the word sig to refer to the relevant signature)
		
1.	Tag is looked up in the current self
	If tag is not found in self
2.		Tag is looked up in "inherited" until one is found
		If no tag is found and the end of the inheritance line is reached
			a runtime osErrTagNotFound failure is generated, dispatch halts
3.	For each element found under the given tag
		If element has a signature (i.e. it is a codeblock)
			If the sig's required param count matches the count of given params
				give the element a score of PERFECT
			else if the sig's required param count is less than the 
			given param count AND the sig has optional params OR rest params
				give the element a score of OK
			else
				give the element a score of FAILED
			
			If the element was scored as FAILED
				discard the element
			else
				For each required parameter in the signature
					If the corresponding given parameter "isNot" whatever
					required parameter's type declaration is
						discard the element
		Else (no signature)
			Move element to end of the list
4.	If found element list is empty, GOTO STEP #2
5.	Sort the element list
		At this point we know that each element in the list is at the least valid for the call, given the available parameters, but some elements may be more valid than others. The elements are sorted according how they scored earlier and how closely a given parameter inherits from the required parameter's type declaration.
		
		A given element (LHS) will precede an alternate element (RHS) if:
			RHS had previously scored lower than LHS
			LHS has a signature and RHS does NOT
			For each param in LHS's sig
				If the param is optional for LHS
					If the param is required for RHS
						LHS does NOT precede RHS (testing stops)
					else
						LHS does precede RHS (testing stops)
				Else if the param is optional for RHS
					If the param is NOT optional for LHS
						LHS does precede RHS (testing stops)
					else
						LHS does NOT precede RHS (testing stops)

	We know here that the param is required for LHS & RHS.
	Obtain the "isA" distance for the given parameter relative to LHS and RHS's required parameter type descriptor.
	
	IsA distance is determined as follows:
		* the distance is 0 if the type instance does not 
		inherit from the given type name 
		(this is an invalid test, and does not come into play 
		in this sorting routine)
		* the distance is 1 if the type instance is the same type 
		as the given type name
		(this is the closest distance)
		* the distance is 1 + 1 for each parent link
		which must be traversed in order to find a descendent which is 
		the same type as the given type name
				
				If LHS's distance is less than RHS's distance
					LHS precedes RHS (testing stops)
				Else if LHS's distance is greater than RHS's distance
					LHS does NOT precede RHS (testing stops)

			Finally, all else failing, LHS does not precede RHS

6. The first element in the list is invoked with the given parameters.

	That concludes the dispatch process. The element which was eventually invoked is removed from the list and the list is saved along with the call in order to facilitate re-dispatch, which is described later.
			
	Dispatch on non-member tags proceeds mostly as described above. The main difference is that in this case, tags are not looked up in the current self. Instead, the current tag registry is used. Tag registries can be chained in order to provide non-global scoping for thread local definitions. This means that if a desired tag is not found in the current registry, that registry may defer to its chain and attempt the lookup there, and on up until there are no further registries (the final registry is always the global registry).
	
	The following steps are modified when dispatching for non-member tags:
	
1. 	Tag is looked up in the current tag registry.
	If tag is not found in that registry
2.		Tag is looked up in the registry's chain until one is found
		If no tag is found and no more registry chains remain
			a runtime osErrTagNotFound failure is generated, dispatch halts

	The remaining steps are identical.

Q: How are two signatures which have different identities, but equal dispatch scores (i.e. they are equal according to the sorting routine) dealt with?
A: It should be a runtime failure, but currently is not.

	After dispatching has completed and the resulting element is invoked, that element may choose to re-dispatch the call, thus switching execution to the next-best element. By default, this element receives the same parameter set as the original call. However, when re-dispatching, a new set of parameters may be supplied. However, this new parameter set must be congruous with the original set or else a runtime error is likely to occur (since the new parameter set may violate parameter restrictions).
	
	Re-dispatch is accomplished by calling "invokeNext" on the currentCapture. If the caller intends to return the value produced by invokeNext, it must be done explicitly.
	
	define foo(x::integer, y::integer) => {
		return (currentCapture->invokeNext)
	}
	define foo(x::integer, y::any) => {
		return (#x * #y)
	}
	
	foo(2, 40) // Yields: 80

This example shows how parameters can be modified for the invokeNext call.

	define foo(x::any, y::integer) => {
		return (#x * #y)
	}
	define foo(x::integer, y::integer) => {
		return (currentCapture->invokeNext('Changed it. ', #y))
	}

	foo(2, 4) // Yields: Changed it. Changed it. Changed it. Changed it. 

Accepting Parameters

	Codeblocks permit parameters to be passed to them in various capacities. Codeblocks can be configured to automatically bind the parameter values passed to them to local variables available only within that particular invocation of that codeblock. As described by the codeblock's signature, these bindings can be based on the position of an individual parameter within the overall list, or by a keyword mapping for optional parameters: -keyword=<value>. In addition, codeblocks can accept variable numbers of arguments which are made available as "rest" parameters.

Q: How do keyword maps on required/positional parameters affect dispatch?
A: ??
	
	Parameters are mapped to local variables starting with any required parameters. Required parameters are always given positionally and must always precede any optional parameters. For each required parameter, the corresponding given parameter value is taken and bound to a local variable under the desired name as described in the codeblock's signature.

Examples
	
The following defines a codeblock which returns the product of its two parameters, x & y.

	define mul(x, y) => {
		return (#x * #y)
	}
	
	mul(4, 5) // Yields: 20

	define sum(lhs, rhs) => {
		return (#lhs + #rhs)
	}
	
	sum('This is #lhs. ', 'This is #rhs.') 
		// Yields: This is #lhs. This is #rhs.

	Optional parameters can be filled either positionally, explicitly or by default values. 
	
	Positionally:
		An optional parameter is filled positionally by the caller simply providing a value for that particular parameter position. 

	Explicitly:
		An optional parameter is filled explicitly by the caller supplying a keyword along with the value. Keywords begin with a unary minus symbol "-" and are followed by a valid tag. There can be no whitespace between the minus symbol and the keyword name. 
		
		Keywords are paired with their values by using the parameter pairing symbol "=". It is also valid to pass only the keyword, in which case the value is an implicit boolean true. It is an error if only a keyword is supplied and the corresponding optional parameter's type decl is incompatible with the boolean type.

	Default Values:
		All optional parameters have a specified default value. In the event that the parameter is not provided by the caller, that parameter will be filled by a copy of its default.

	As a special case, parameters can also be passed as pairs of values. This is accomplished by using the equals symbol "=" and placing the two values on either side of it. The resulting parameter value will be of type "pair". This form is used primarily when the caller is supplying two values that are tied together in some manner, for example, a key and a value being placed into an associative container. 
	
	map->insert(1='one') // key 1 is supplied with its value 'one'
	
	This form is also used when explicitly supplying an optional parameter by name.
	
	foo(-optP = 42) // optional parameter 'optP' is given the value 42

	Once all required and/or optional parameters, if any, have been accounted for, any remaining values are "rest" parameters. A codeblock will only accept rest parameters if its signature declares it as doing so. Rest parameters given to a codeblock which does not accept them is an error. Rest parameters are made available within the codeblock as a staticarray which is assigned to the local variable name as dictated by the codeblock's signature. Rest parameters are kept in the order in which they were provided by the caller.

	Parameters are always given by-reference. This means that the actual value is passed into the tag, as opposed to having a copy made and then passed (by-value).
	
Q: Should some types be passed by-value instead of by-reference?
	EG. integers, decimals and maybe strings could be by-value?
A: ??
Q: Where is the LP8 -copy (-async, soap, -rpc) feature?
A: ??
Q: Where is specification of the "params" array
A: ??

Returning Values

	A codeblock can return a value to its caller as a result of its execution. This can be accomplished using either the "return" or "yield" reserved words. The value to return immediately follows the usage of that word and must be surrounded by parentheses. Return and yield can also be used without a value. In this case, the codeblock's return value is an implicit "null" (or whatever the returnValue may have been set to). In this case, an empty set of parentheses is used.
	
	Return values are always given by-reference.

	The difference between the behaviors of return and yield is the state in which they leave the current capture after returning. This behavior is described in the following section on captures.

Captures

	Captures are the basic frame of execution in the Lasso VM. All code that executes does so within a capture. When a codeblock is invoked, a capture is first automatically created for that codeblock to execute in.

	While codeblocks are stateless (once they have had their code established), captures do maintain state, some of which may change frequently during execution. This state consists of: 
	
	* the current codeblock
	* the current "self" and "inherited"
	* the current "params" staticarray
	* the current "locals" membermap
	* the current program counter, or "PC". This value is the offset within that capture's codeblock's code at which execution is currently happening.
	* a set of registers which the VM uses for execution
	* the name of the current call
	* the current "continuation" - the element which is executed after the current capture completes
	* the set of handlers which must be executed before the capture completes
	* a homeCapture, which is the capture in which this capture was created
	* a memberstream containing the additional selected elements which may be re-dispatched to
	
	When a capture is invoked, it will in turn invoke its bound codeblock which will execute within the context of that capture's state. The currently executing capture is known as the "current capture" and is made available through the "currentCapture" expression.

	As mentioned, captures are created automatically when a codeblock is executed. Captures can also be manually created by using curly braces as an expression. This occurs when a capture is used in a givenBlock association.
	
	... the surrounding ...
	#ary->forEach => {
		... a capture of the surrounding ...
	}
	
Above, the block given to ->forEach is a capture object which ->forEach receives as its givenBlock and may execute as needed. 

The following creates a capture and assigns it to a variable.

	local(cap = { ... the capture's code ... })
	
The variable can be executed at any point and the code contained within will operate as if it had been executed in the context in which it was created. 

	#cap() // Invoke the capture
	
	Because all executing code occurs within a capture, every capture that is manually created (as in the two examples above) is done so within the context of another capture. This surrounding capture is known as the new capture's "homeCapture". Not all captures will have a home. Captures which are automatically created based on the invocation of a codeblock will not have a home. A capture that is created within a capture that does have a home, will have its home set to that capture's home. This means that nested captures will all have the same homeCapture. 
	
	A capture with a home will always take the following environment values from that home: self, locals, params, current call name. A capture without a home (a capture created automatically by the system when invoking a codeblock) will have state values based on the circumstances of the call. All other capture state is unique to each capture. 
	
	The current homeCapture is very important for determining the behavior of return and yield. Because captures are intended to execute as if they had been done so directly within their home, return and yield will both behave by exiting from the current home. This type of return is known as "non-local".

The following example implements a potential "contains" test.
	
	define contains(a::array, val) => {
		#a->forEach => {
			#val == #1?
				return (true) // this return is non-local
		}
		return (false)
	}

Even though the "return true" occurs within a capture that is potentially several frames deep, it causes all intervening captures to be exited (with all their handlers executing in the process) up to and including the block's homeCapture.

Q: What is the precise behavior of a non-local return from a homeCapture which is not "on the stack"
A: ?? test it and see

	A capture can be created and detached from its home in order to escape from this behavior. The easiest way to accomplish this is to use the capture type directly, passing it a capture to copy from as a givenBlock. Captures created in this manner are implicitly detached.
	
	capture => { ... capture to copy from ... }

	The desired self, locals and params can also be explicitly set in this manner as well. The signature for the capture type's onCreate looks as follows.

	capture->oncreate(	
						self = null, 
						locals::membermap = membermap, 
						params::staticarray = staticarray,
						home::capture = null,
						detached::boolean = true)

The following creates a capture containing only a reference to the current self. The locals, params and other values are created just for that capture based on the default values shown above. The values contained by the surrounding capture (which would normally be the homeCapture) are ignored.

	local(cap = capture(self) => { return (self->size) })
	
	#cap() // Yields result of self->size

Note that because the capture above is created detached, the return operates as normal and simply produces its value to the caller. It is not a non-local return.

	Yielding from a capture differs from returning in how it leaves the capture. A return will reset the capture's PC to zero while a yield will not modify the PC. This has an effect on how the capture behaves if it is executed a second time. A capture that has been returned from will begin executing from the start. A capture that has been yielded from will begin executing immediately after the expression which caused it to yield in the first place. A capture may yield many times.
	
	local(
		cap = capture => {
			yield (1)
			yield (2)
			yield (3)
			yield (4)
		}
	)
	
	#cap() // Yields 1
	#cap() // Yields 2 
	#cap() // Yields 3
	#cap() // Yields 4
	#cap() // Yields 1 - capture reached the end and reset
	
Note that once a capture reaches its end, the PC will automatically be reset back to zero.

Even though a capture has yielded, it can still elect to return, thus resetting itself.

	#cap = capture => {
		yield (1)
		yield (2)
		return (3) // subsequent calls will start from beginning
		yield (4) // this is unreachable
	}

	Captures provide two other forms of yield and return: yieldHome and returnHome. These are only valid when the capture has a home and can be used to return from a capture TO its home, instead of returning FROM its home. These forms are special purpose and used for accomplishing some implementation details such as certain looping constructs or control structures. (Example: loop_continue and loop_abort are both rely on using these forms.)

-----------------------------
Copyright 2007 LassoSoft, LLC